content/blog/Set-wifi-via-bluetooth/RaspberryPi-manual/index.md, before:

---
title: Manually Install Bluetooth Code on RPi
date: "2021-12-05T10:00:00.000Z"
description: Step-by-step commands in RPi Terminal to install files & configure for BLE server.
mainTag: Installation
---
#### About
Step by Step (manuallly) install on your Raspberry Pi of a bluetooth BLE Server written in Python .  BLE advertises a custom service that communicates with the IOS app to remotely set the wifi on a headless raspberry pi.

#### Requirements
*Python3: version 3.7 or later **must** be instaled on the Raspberry Pi or the install script will exit.*

#### General
All commands below are to be typed at the prompt in a terminal window on the Raspberry Pi.
- If you are on a headless RPi - it is assumed you have SSH into the RPi from your computer in a terminal window.
- If you are using the desktop version of the Pi OS - please open a terminal session.

Copy/paste or type the commands in the code block into your terminal on the RPi - one line at the time - and run them (hit return on keyboard)

#### Step 1 - get the Raspberry Pi ready
1. Check your Raspberry pi OS release:
```
sudo cat /etc/os-release
```
> The software has been tested on Raspbian 10 & 11. Consider upgrading the RPI to a newer release if your release is below 10.
2. Update the Raspberry Pi:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get full-upgrade
sudo reboot
```
3. Check your version of python3 on the Rpi.
> If you have not installed a new version of Python3 on the pi you may use the version that came with the operating system - this command returns the version of python3 on your RPi:
```
python3 --version
```
> **If the version returned is less then Python 3.7, you must install a newer version of Python before continuing.**
4. Check if you have pip installed:
```
python3 -m pip --version
```
5. If it is  not installed (*returned message: No module named pip*) - install it:
```
sudo apt install python3-pip
```


#### Step 2: download the python files
You will create a directory called **btwifiset** under your home directory and dowload the python files into it.
1. Navigate to your home directory, create btwifiset, then navigate there:
```
cd ~
mkdir btwifiset
cd btwifiset
```
2. Download the compressed file into this directory, then extract the files:
```
wget https://www.normfrenette.com//btwifiset.tar.gz
tar -xzvf btwifiset.tar.gz
```
3. Set permissions on some of the files:
```
sudo chmod 777 wifiup.py
sudo chmod 777 wifidown.py
```
You now have all the necessary files to run the BLE server on the RPi.  However, you need to install some python modules and modify/create systemd services.

#### Step 3 - Check for/Install Python modules:
The BLE server python script requires the use of two python modules: **dbis** and **GLib**

> Note: If you installed a new version of python and created an alias called **python** for it - replace all instances of **python3** in the commands below with the alias (python).

1. Check if dbus is installed (do not forget the single quotes):
```
python3 -c 'import dbus'
```
2. if this command returns: *no module...* - you need to install dbus:
```
python3 -m pip install dbus-python
```
3. Check if GLib is installed:
```
python3 -c 'from gi.repository import GLib'
```
4. if this command returns: *no module... or Import Error ...* - you need to install GLib with the following commands:
```
sudo apt install libgirepository1.0-dev gcc libcairo2-dev pkg-config python3-dev gir1.2-gtk-3.0
python3 -m pip install PyGobject
```
5. test the installs - these command should return nothing if properly installed:
```
python3 -c 'import dbus'
python3 -c 'from gi.repository import GLib'
```

#### Step 4 - Modify the BlueZ service that came with Raspbian:
The system service for bluetotth needs to be modified to run BLE,  and to stop it from constantly requesting the battery status of the iphone/ipad that will connect to it (*default behavior*).

1. Open the configuration file in your prefered editor - here we use nano:
```
sudo nano /lib/systemd/system/bluetooth.service
```
2. Find the line that starts with **ExecStart** and add the following add the end of the line - on the same line, leaving a space before the two hyphens:
```
  --experiemntal -P battery
```
> the line should read something like: 
>ExecStart=/usr/lib/bluetooth/bluetoothd --experimental -P battery
3. Save the file (for nano: Ctrl o + return) and exit (for nano: Ctrl x)
4. Reboot the Raspberry Pi for changes to take effect:
``` 
sudo reboot
```

#### step 5 - Verify that wpa_supplicant.conf exists
If your pi has ever connected to wifi, you should have a file called wpa_supplicant.conf.  If not we need to create it.  Run this command:
```
sudo cat /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
If you get a message with : ***No such file or directory***, The file does not exists and you need to create it (see below:  **If the file does not exists**).  

##### If the file exists:
At this point, you are seing the content of the file in the terminal window.  Please check that both of the following lines appear at the top of the file (order is not important) - XX is a country code such as US, GB, CA etc.
```
country=XX     
update_config=1
```
If either (or both) of these lines are missing - open the file in an editor and add the missing lines below the first line of the file. To edit the file:
```
sudo nano /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
Then add the missing lines from above to the file.  For country code - make sure you use your own [country code](https://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/country_code_list.htm)

##### If the file does exists:
Create the file and open it in an editor:
```
sudo touch /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
sudo nano /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
Then copy/paste the following at the top of the file - making sure to replace the country code XX with your correct [country code](https://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/country_code_list.htm)
```
ctrl_interface=DIR=/var/run/wpa_supplicant GROUP=netdev
country=US
update_config=1

```
Save the file and exit the editor.

#### Step 6 - Create the btwifiset.service file
1. Find the path to your python interpreter:
    - If you are using the Python Interpreter that came with the OS:
    ```
    command -v python3
    ```
        this should return something like: 
        /usr/bin/python3.7
    - If you installed a new Python version and created an alias called **python**
    ```
    command -v  python
    ```
        this should return something like: 
        alias python='/usr/local/bin/python3.9'
> In any case, note the full path starting with / , and replace it below where it says /full/path/to/python
    
2. Create the btwifiset.service file and open it in an editor:
```
sudo  touch /etc/systemd/system/btwifiset.service
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/btwifiset.service</span>
```
3. copy the below ans insert in the editor:
> Note: replace the path-to-python3 and the home directory path to match your system
```
[Unit]
Description=Set Wi-Fi over Bluetooth service
After=multi-user.target

[Service]
Type=simple
User=pi
Restart=always
ExecStart=/full/path/to/python /home/pi/btwifiset/btwifi.py

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target

```
4. Save the file and exit the editor
5. Run the following commands:
```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable btwifiset.service
sudo systemctl start btwifiset.service
```
6. At this point, the bluetooth BLE service is running automatically upon boot of the RPi. 
    - If you want to stop it : 
	```
    sudo systemctl stop btwifiset.service</span>
    ```
    - If you want to start it again  : 
	```
    sudo systemctl restart btwifiset.service</span>
    ```

> You are ready to use the ios app ***SetWifiViaBT*** with the raspberry pi.  Enjoy!

*Note- the ios app is not yet published on the App Store - but it is coming soon!*

#### Extra - Test the bluetooth service:
It is possible to test the bluetooth service without the SetWifiViaBT IOS app, by downloading a generic bluetooth app from the app store, which can see  and display all bluetooth services available.  
    
1. Download a generic bluetooth app such as "LightBlue"  from the ios app store.
2. This link provides more information: [punchthrough.com](https://punchthrough.com/lightblue-features/)
3. Launch the app and select the Raspberry Pi in the list (may appear as the name of the RPi if it was changed) 
4. Click "show" under Advertisement

> End of manual install instructions.

Commit message:

modify btwifiset.sh and manual instructions to get the dbus dependencies now missing from latest pi os lite 64bit

content/blog/Set-wifi-via-bluetooth/RaspberryPi-manual/index.md, after:

---
title: Manually Install Bluetooth Code on RPi
date: "2021-12-05T10:00:00.000Z"
description: Step-by-step commands in RPi Terminal to install files & configure for BLE server.
mainTag: Installation
---
#### About
Step by Step (manuallly) install on your Raspberry Pi of a bluetooth BLE Server written in Python .  BLE advertises a custom service that communicates with the IOS app to remotely set the wifi on a headless raspberry pi.

#### Requirements
*Python3: version 3.7 or later **must** be instaled on the Raspberry Pi or the install script will exit.*

#### General
All commands below are to be typed at the prompt in a terminal window on the Raspberry Pi.
- If you are on a headless RPi - it is assumed you have SSH into the RPi from your computer in a terminal window.
- If you are using the desktop version of the Pi OS - please open a terminal session.

Copy/paste or type the commands in the code block into your terminal on the RPi - one line at the time - and run them (hit return on keyboard)

#### Step 1 - get the Raspberry Pi ready
1. Check your Raspberry pi OS release:
```
sudo cat /etc/os-release
```
> The software has been tested on Raspbian 10 & 11. Consider upgrading the RPI to a newer release if your release is below 10.
2. Update the Raspberry Pi:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get full-upgrade
sudo reboot
```
3. Check your version of python3 on the Rpi.
> If you have not installed a new version of Python3 on the pi you may use the version that came with the operating system - this command returns the version of python3 on your RPi:
```
python3 --version
```
> **If the version returned is less then Python 3.7, you must install a newer version of Python before continuing.** Here is one way to [install the newest python](/Python/Installation-RaspberryPi-Higher-Version/) 
4. Check if you have pip installed (if you installed a newer version of python and created an alias (python) - use the alias below instead of python3 in the commands.)
```
python3 -m pip --version
```
5. If it is  not installed (*returned message: No module named pip*) - install it:
```
sudo apt install python3-pip
```


#### Step 2: download the python files
You will create a directory called **btwifiset** under your home directory and dowload the python files into it.
1. Navigate to your home directory, create btwifiset, then navigate there:
```
cd ~
mkdir btwifiset
cd btwifiset
```
2. Download the compressed file into this directory, then extract the files:
```
wget https://www.normfrenette.com//btwifiset.tar.gz
tar -xzvf btwifiset.tar.gz
```
3. Set permissions on some of the files:
```
sudo chmod 777 wifiup.py
sudo chmod 777 wifidown.py
```
You now have all the necessary files to run the BLE server on the RPi.  However, you need to install some python modules and modify/create systemd services.

#### Step 3 - Check for/Install Python modules:
The BLE server python script requires the use of two python modules: **dbis** and **GLib**

> Note: If you installed a new version of python and created an alias called **python** for it - replace all instances of **python3** in the commands below with the alias (python).

1. Check if dbus is installed (do not forget the single quotes):
```
python3 -c 'import dbus'
```
if this command returns: *no module...* - you need to install dbus.

2. Check if GLib is installed:
```
python3 -c 'from gi.repository import GLib'
```
if this command returns: *no module... or Import Error ...* - you need to install GLib.

3. If either dbus or GLib needs to be installed - first run the following command to install needed dependencies:
```
sudo apt-get install -y build-essential libgirepository1.0-dev gcc libcairo2-dev pkg-config python3-dev gir1.2-gtk-3.0 libdbus-glib-1-dev
```

4. Then, if you need to install GLib use pip to install PyGobject:
```
python3 -m pip install PyGobject
```
5. And, if you need to install dbus - install it using pip as well:
```
python3 -m pip install dbus-python
```

6. Test the installs - these command should return nothing if properly installed:
```
python3 -c 'import dbus'
python3 -c 'from gi.repository import GLib'
```

#### Step 4 - Modify the BlueZ service that came with Raspbian:
The system service for bluetotth needs to be modified to run BLE,  and to stop it from constantly requesting the battery status of the iphone/ipad that will connect to it (*default behavior*).

1. Open the configuration file in your prefered editor - here we use nano:
```
sudo nano /lib/systemd/system/bluetooth.service
```
2. Find the line that starts with **ExecStart** and add the following add the end of the line - on the same line, leaving a space before the two hyphens:
```
  --experiemntal -P battery
```
> the line should read something like: 
>ExecStart=/usr/lib/bluetooth/bluetoothd --experimental -P battery
3. Save the file (for nano: Ctrl o + return) and exit (for nano: Ctrl x)
4. Reboot the Raspberry Pi for changes to take effect:
``` 
sudo reboot
```

#### step 5 - Verify that wpa_supplicant.conf exists
If your pi has ever connected to wifi, you should have a file called wpa_supplicant.conf.  If not we need to create it.  Run this command:
```
sudo cat /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
If you get a message with : ***No such file or directory***, The file does not exists and you need to create it (see below:  **If the file does not exists**).  

##### If the file exists:
At this point, you are seing the content of the file in the terminal window.  Please check that both of the following lines appear at the top of the file (order is not important) - XX is a country code such as US, GB, CA etc.
```
country=XX     
update_config=1
```
If either (or both) of these lines are missing - open the file in an editor and add the missing lines below the first line of the file. To edit the file:
```
sudo nano /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
Then add the missing lines from above to the file.  For country code - make sure you use your own [country code](https://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/country_code_list.htm)

##### If the file does exists:
Create the file and open it in an editor:
```
sudo touch /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
sudo nano /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
```
Then copy/paste the following at the top of the file - making sure to replace the country code XX with your correct [country code](https://www.nationsonline.org/oneworld/country_code_list.htm)
```
ctrl_interface=DIR=/var/run/wpa_supplicant GROUP=netdev
country=US
update_config=1

```
Save the file and exit the editor.

#### Step 6 - Create the btwifiset.service file
1. Find the path to your python interpreter:
    - If you are using the Python Interpreter that came with the OS:
    ```
    command -v python3
    ```
        this should return something like: 
        /usr/bin/python3.7
    - If you installed a new Python version and created an alias called **python**
    ```
    command -v  python
    ```
        this should return something like: 
        alias python='/usr/local/bin/python3.9'
> In any case, note the full path starting with / , and replace it below where it says /full/path/to/python
    
2. Create the btwifiset.service file and open it in an editor:
```
sudo  touch /etc/systemd/system/btwifiset.service
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/btwifiset.service</span>
```
3. copy the below ans insert in the editor:
> Note: replace the path-to-python3 and the home directory path to match your system
```
[Unit]
Description=Set Wi-Fi over Bluetooth service
After=multi-user.target

[Service]
Type=simple
User=pi
Restart=always
ExecStart=/full/path/to/python /home/pi/btwifiset/btwifi.py

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target

```
4. Save the file and exit the editor
5. Run the following commands:
```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable btwifiset.service
sudo systemctl start btwifiset.service
```
6. At this point, the bluetooth BLE service is running automatically upon boot of the RPi. 
    - If you want to stop it : 
	```
    sudo systemctl stop btwifiset.service</span>
    ```
    - If you want to start it again  : 
	```
    sudo systemctl restart btwifiset.service</span>
    ```

> You are ready to use the ios app ***SetWifiViaBT*** with the raspberry pi.  Enjoy!

*Note- the ios app is not yet published on the App Store - but it is coming soon!*

#### Extra - Test the bluetooth service:
It is possible to test the bluetooth service without the SetWifiViaBT IOS app, by downloading a generic bluetooth app from the app store, which can see  and display all bluetooth services available.  
    
1. Download a generic bluetooth app such as "LightBlue"  from the ios app store.
2. This link provides more information: [punchthrough.com](https://punchthrough.com/lightblue-features/)
3. Launch the app and select the Raspberry Pi in the list (may appear as the name of the RPi if it was changed) 
4. Click "show" under Advertisement

> End of manual install instructions.
