content/blog/Set-wifi-via-bluetooth/RaspberryPi-automatic/index.md, before:

---
title: Automated Install of Bluetooth Code on RPi
date: "2021-12-05T23:46:37.121Z"
description: Download and run one bash file to automatically  install python files & configure RPi for BLE.
mainTag: Installation
---
#### Current Version: Beta - April 22, 2022
In the early days of deploying thi software, I am making changes often based on early adopters comments and experiences.  Check here often to see if I have posted a new version - identified by the ***date***.
> To check current version date on your Raspberry Pi:  Open btwifiset.log file in the btwifiset directory and look for the line that starts with ******* Staring BTwifiSet - version date: ...

#### About
Automated install on your Raspberry Pi of a bluetooth BLE Server written in Python .  BLE advertises a custom service that communicates with the IOS app to remotely set the wifi on a headless raspberry pi.

#### Requirements
*Python3: version 3.7 or later **must** be installed on the Raspberry Pi or the install script will exit.*

#### Automated Install - How To: 
On your Raspberry Pi: Open a terminal window and Run the following commands at the prompt:

1. Make sure your Raspberry Pi is up to date - type:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get full-upgrade
sudo reboot
```

2. Navigate to your home directory - type:  
```
cd ~
```
3. Download and run the script - type:
```
curl  https://normfrenette.com/btwifisetInstall.sh | sudo bash
```

That's it. 

***The code is open source under the standard MIT license.***

#### What the Install script does:

- Checks the python version and allows for selection if more than one Python3 interpreter is installed .
- Creates the directory: **btwifiset** under your home directory, and downloads the BLE server python files there.
- Install dbus and GLib (pyCairo) python modules only if they are not already installed.
- Modifies the existing bluetoothd.service system file to run the bluetooth BLE service created Python.
- Creates a new systemd service file: btwifiset.service and starts it (+ auto-start on boot).

The script provides written feedback on install progress in the terminal.  Upon completion, you are ready to use the ios app ***SetWifiViaBT*** with the raspberry pi.  Enjoy!

*Note- the ios app is not yet published on the App Store - but it is coming soon!*

Commit message:

updates name of iphone app for bt wifi set

content/blog/Set-wifi-via-bluetooth/RaspberryPi-automatic/index.md, after:

---
title: Automated Install of Bluetooth Code on RPi
date: "2021-12-05T23:46:37.121Z"
description: Download and run one bash file to automatically  install python files & configure RPi for BLE.
mainTag: Installation
---
#### Current Version: Beta - April 22, 2022
In the early days of deploying this software, I am making changes often based on early adopters comments and experiences.  Check here often to see if I have posted a new version - identified by the ***date***.
> To check current version date on your Raspberry Pi:  Open btwifiset.log file in the btwifiset directory and look for the line that starts with ******* Starting BTwifiSet - version date: ...

#### About
Automated install on your Raspberry Pi of a bluetooth BLE Server written in Python .  BLE advertises a custom service that communicates with the IOS app to remotely set the wifi on a headless raspberry pi.

#### Requirements
*Python3: version 3.7 or later **must** be installed on the Raspberry Pi or the install script will exit.*

#### Automated Install - How To: 
On your Raspberry Pi: Open a terminal window and Run the following commands at the prompt:

1. Make sure your Raspberry Pi is up to date - type:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get full-upgrade
sudo reboot
```

2. Navigate to your home directory - type:  
```
cd ~
```
3. Download and run the script - type:
```
curl  https://normfrenette.com/btwifisetInstall.sh | sudo bash
```

That's it. 

***The code is open source under the standard MIT license.***

#### What the Install script does:

- Checks the python version and allows for selection if more than one Python3 interpreter is installed .
- Creates the directory: **btwifiset** under your home directory, and downloads the BLE server python files there.
- Install dbus and GLib (pyCairo) python modules only if they are not already installed.
- Modifies the existing bluetoothd.service system file to run the bluetooth BLE service created Python.
- Creates a new systemd service file: btwifiset.service and starts it (+ auto-start on boot).

The script provides written feedback on install progress in the terminal.  Upon completion, you are ready to use the ios app ***BTBerryWifi*** with the raspberry pi.  Enjoy!

>Note- the ios app is called ***BTBerryWifi*** in the Apple App Store.   Best to search for its name exactly, since I messed up the keywords - but a search for "Raspberry pi wifi bluetooth" should work also.
