content/blog/Looper/assembly-circuits/index.md, before:

---
title: Assembly of Looper Circuit
date: "2021-12-30T10:00:00.000Z"
description: instructions, details and picture of the circuit board assenbly
mainTag: How-to-Build-it
---

This might be a long page - I assemble the circuits and take lots of pictures.  Hope it is useful...

>Note: This shows how to build the Looper+Buffer option.  If you are not building the buffer, refer to the schematics for what you don't need to build (I'll mention it below as I go)

> For the buffer: I am using the option with one female 1/4 inch guitar jack input and a wired 3.5 mm output male output jack.

#### Getting the Parts ready

I recommend getting all the parts laid out, labeled as necessary before starting.  I have a wooden desk that I dedicated to electronics.  If you look carefully, you can see  burnt spots from solder/soldering iron from past projects.  I recommend you don't assemble this on your Louis XIV antique table ... but to each his own.

##### General Parts

![general parts ready](./partsready.png)

- Top left: Raspberri pi 3b+
- Row underneath the Raspberry Pi, left to right:
    - red, green, blue LED
    - 7 segment common cathode LED
    - push-on momentary stomp switch
    - on-off-on DPDT toggle switch
    - underneath the switches: 1/4 inch mono female jack
- Next row underneath:
    - RPi prototyping breadboard hat and its black connector (comes with it)
    - Sabrent usb sound card (green input is mic, pink is headphone)
    - 3.5mm mono male to male wire connector (I will cut this in two and only use one for the buffer output)
    -Below the red breadboard:  9V battery connector with leads.
- Top right:
    - 2 spools of solid copper wire - it's either 18 or 20 gauge.  I use a red and a black because I like to identify red leads that go to VCC (3.3V) and black leads that go to ground. But that is not important.
    - Solder iron.  A while back I invested in a nice one with temperature control, but it's a bit overkill for this project.  A standard solder iron is just fine.  Make sure you get a sponge though.

##### Small Electronics components

I don't know about you - but my small electronics component do not like my table, and at the first opportunity they jump off and go hide under the couch or the bookcase.  So over the years I have learned that if I take 5 minutes to identify them, and tape them to a white sheet of paper - I save a lot of time later.

For this build I also added information for the reistor color code (in case one does falls of the table anyway: I can figure out which is which). For the capacitors, I wrote down the number/letter code. For the transistor, I wrote the location and name of each pin - to match my schematic

![resistors ready](./partsresistors.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Resitors</p>

---

![capacitor ready](./partscapacitors.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Capacitors</p>

---

![transistor ready](./partstransistor.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Transistor</p>

>Note: Since I had one left in my box of parts, I decide to use a transistor socket (shown on left of transistor).  It is not necessary, but it makes it easier to solder, without having to worry about getting the transistors leads to hot (which can damage the transistor).  I did not use one in my first prototype and everything was fine.  You don't have to use one. 

---

Commit message:

modified switches circuits and added assembly pcb layout

content/blog/Looper/assembly-circuits/index.md, after:

---
title: Assembly of Looper Circuit
date: "2021-12-30T10:00:00.000Z"
description: instructions, details and picture of the circuit board assenbly
mainTag: How-to-Build-it
---

This might be a long page - I assemble the circuits and take lots of pictures.  Hope it is useful...

>Note: This shows how to build the Looper+Buffer option.  If you are not building the buffer, refer to the schematics for what you don't need to build (I'll mention it below as I go)

> For the buffer: I am using the option with one female 1/4 inch guitar jack input and a wired 3.5 mm output male output jack.

#### Getting the Parts ready

I recommend getting all the parts laid out, labeled as necessary before starting.  I have a wooden desk that I dedicated to electronics.  If you look carefully, you can see  burnt spots from solder/soldering iron from past projects.  I recommend you don't assemble this on your Louis XIV antique table ... but to each his own.

##### General Parts

![general parts ready](./partsready.png)

- Top left: Raspberri pi 3b+
- Row underneath the Raspberry Pi, left to right:
    - red, green, blue LED
    - 7 segment common cathode LED
    - push-on momentary stomp switch
    - on-off-on DPDT toggle switch
    - underneath the switches: 1/4 inch mono female jack
- Next row underneath:
    - RPi prototyping breadboard hat and its black connector (comes with it)
    - Sabrent usb sound card (green input is mic, pink is headphone)
    - 3.5mm mono male to male wire connector (I will cut this in two and only use one for the buffer output)
    -Below the red breadboard:  9V battery connector with leads.
- Top right:
    - 2 spools of solid copper wire - it's either 18 or 20 gauge.  I use a red and a black because I like to identify red leads that go to VCC (3.3V) and black leads that go to ground. But that is not important.
    - Solder iron.  A while back I invested in a nice one with temperature control, but it's a bit overkill for this project.  A standard solder iron is just fine.  Make sure you get a sponge though.

##### Small Electronics components

I don't know about you - but my small electronics component do not like my table, and at the first opportunity they jump off and go hide under the couch or the bookcase.  So over the years I have learned that if I take 5 minutes to identify them, and tape them to a white sheet of paper - I save a lot of time later.

For this build I also added information for the reistor color code (in case one does falls of the table anyway: I can figure out which is which). For the capacitors, I wrote down the number/letter code. For the transistor, I wrote the location and name of each pin - to match my schematic

![resistors ready](./partsresistors.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Resitors</p>

---

![capacitor ready](./partscapacitors.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Capacitors</p>

---

![transistor ready](./partstransistor.png)
<p style="text-align:center">Transistor</p>

>Note: To the left is shown a transistor holder - which some people like to use. I do not use it in this build because it makes the transistor higher then the LED - and we want the diodes flush with the top of the case.  If you decide to use it - you will have to raise the LEDs and the 7-segment up from the board as you solder - to provide clearance for the top of the transistor.

---

#### Layout of components

> This layout uses the raspberry pi breadboard hat recomended in the parts list.  If you are using a different breadbaord you will likely have to adjust the layout.

The layout is constructed to scale using a square grid.  A box containing a number is a resistor, and the squares where the box starts and ends represents the holes into which the resistor leads go into.  This is also how non-electrolitic capacitors are shown.

Electrolytics capacitors are shown laid flat on the board - because of clearance issues.  two leads come out of the "box" to indicate the hole where they should be soldered.  Pay attention the the negative lead indicated by three minus signs (- - -) on the box drawing - which corresponds to the negative markings on the electrolytic capacitor can.

Diodes are shown as circle with a + and - sign indicating the holes where leads go into.  The negative (-) coresponds to the shortest lead.  The positive (+) coresponds to the longest lead.

The 7-segment LED should be oriented so that the "dot" is nearest the Red LED

Squares which contain a red letter code indicate that a insulated wire must be connected to that hole - and the other end of the wire connected to a point off the board (typically a switch or an input/output jack) - as labelled in the table accompanying the layout.

![circuit pcb layout](./assemblyLayout.png)

![ pcb layout Table](./layoutTable.png)
